---
layout: post
title: "Annual Learnings 2023"
date: 2023-11-12
mathjax: true
---

I have encircled the sun one more time, aboard this amazing planet, and so it is perhaps a good time to reflect on important themes and ideas I've learnt, adopted or encountered and want to adopt, during the past year. 

- **The idea of a muse**: In his book The War of Art, Stephen Pressfield talk about the idea of a muse, which happens to come from the ancient greeks. I'd heard about this before, in a TED talk by Elizabeth Gilbert. The idea is simple: creative professionals sometimes invoke an imaginary angel known as the muse, and submit to the muse their goals, with the understanding that the actual creative work is done by the muse, and they are merely a medium. This takes off the psychological pressue from the creative professional, and also allows them to accept periods of temporary failure. This idea stemming from the ancient greeks has tremendous relevance to economics and productivity. I would be remiss if I didn't mention the similarity of this idea with one of the central themes of the Bhagawad Gita, namely

> [BG 2.47] You have a right to perform your prescribed duties, but you are not entitled to the fruits of your actions. Never consider yourself to be the cause of the results of your activities, nor be attached to inaction.

- **The idea of an infinite game**, and staying in the game, courtesy Simon Sinek: the goal is not to 'win' - there is no such thing as winning in business, or in life, for all victories are temporary. The goal is to remain in the game, and not get eliminated. Staying alive in the long term requires intelligence, courage, and the will to evolve at the right time. 

- **The identity trap**: this is also adopted from advice produced by Sinek for corporations. If a corporation belives it is in the business of making computers then it will only try to make computers. But if it believes it is in the business of making people's lives better with technology, then it will do new things when making computers isn't a great market anymore. I extrapolate this to individuals: what do we see ourselves as? 

- **The shortness of life**: In sept 2023, while waiting at a traffic light, I was rear ended by a speeding SUV. I escaped with minor injuries and intenal brusing, but the incident shook me up. My immediate thoughts on jumping out of my car a few seconds after impact and airbag deployment were: this is a wake up call, life is short. Who am I? What do I really want to do with my life? 

- **Economics and strategy edcation**: I feel modern curriculum for children lack education in basic concepts of economics -- these basic ideas as so basic that we need not wait till college to teach them formally -- I'm talking about things like: what are prices and how do they arise, 'cooperation vs competition', a prisoner's dilemma, tragedy of the commons, iterated vs one-time games, what is a strategy, what are 'incentives', how should one reason about the incentives of a party in any given situation, etc. I strongly feel, we would do well to educate our kids in basic principles of psychology (what are other people thinking? how am I feeling? Why?), strategy (what should I do to facilitate X?), economics (why is something expensive or cheap, what are economic forces?) I feel these topics can be introduced to kds as young as 8-9 years, via a carefully curated material that is practical and engaging. I intend to pursue this, starting small in 2024. 

- **Thinking for the long term**: Short term and long term planning is often in conflict. What is good in the short term is often bad for the long term. This is true for companies making decisions to maximize shorter term stock performance, and equally true for individuals making professional career deicsions or decisions on personal health. I think our evolutionary arc, which until recently meant that we lived much shorter than we do now on average, primes us to make shorter term decisions than we should. We would do well to recognize the source of this conflict and try to design around it -- make short term decisions that are not extremely counter to long term optimal decisions, but at least partially doevtail the longer term decisions. 

- **Evolutionary mismatch**: Many problems and pains are a result of evolutionary mismatch: diabetes (easy access to abundant calories), heart disease (not enough cardiovascular exertion in modern sedentary lifetyles), Post Parteum Depression (giving birth to kids and raising them in non-communal settings, on one's own). While it is hard to go back to the way of live 10,000 years ago, we would do well to recognize this fact and try to design our lives around it. Walk more, live more communally, eat more fresh vegetables, fruits and nuts. 

- **The idea of definite optimism** (Peter Thiel): The Indefinite person (or company , society, etc.) believes that the future is random and not very much in their control, and therefore they hedge their bets by doing multiple different things, acquiring many skills and degrees. The Definite person has a concrete idea about the future and does that one thing that makes him/her very good at it, and continues to chip away at creating that future.

- **Intermittent fasting:** I began 16:8 IF on my birthday. Its been going well so far. I eat between 12 noon and 8 pm. I don't feel hungry at breakfast time any more. I drink abundant water before 12, as well as a cup of black coffee. I also rationalize the benefits to myself by assuming that until recently, humans did not have stored foods avaialble to eat when the woke up, and must have had to go hunting/gathering in the early hours before their first meals -- if this theory is correct, then our bodies are adapted to not eating soon after we wake up, but only after a few hours. Speaking more scientifically, IF works by forcing the body to use stored energy, first glycogen and then fats. I was also encouraged by the work and findings of Dr. Satchin Panda. EDIT 2024-04-11: I stopped IF around Feb 2024, after losing about 15 lbs of weight, although it is hard to attribute that drop to just IF, since I was eating healthier in general and also exercising regularly. It is now April 2024, and I've kept that weight off. 

- **Alcohol:** No amount of alcohol is health for us. Here I've drawn inspiration from Mukesh Bansal. I wil be experimnting with not drinking for a few months, and if that goes well socially, then I will attempt to extend this indefinitely. EDIT 2024-03-01: Eliminating alcohol completely can have a negative effect on socialization, which in turn can negatively influence mental and phyical health. I now feel that it is optimal to drink a very small amount of alcohol. 

- **Sugar:** A lot of ink has been spilt on this. Refined sugar is a major evil. I will be absaining for a few months to see how things go. EDIT 2024-03-1: It was hard to stay away from sugar completely because we are surrounded by it in many forms. I only abstained 100% for a couple of months. 

- **Sleep:** Sleep at 9-9:30 and wake up at 5:30 - 6. EDIT 2024-03-01: This remains an unfulfilled goal.

- **The stoics:** I discovered this though a podcast called Hidden Brain run by Shankar Vedantam. In one of the episodes, Vedantam interviews William Irvine, a professor who practices stoicism, and has written an accessible book on it ("the guide to the good life"). Stoicism appeals to me a lot. My favorite thing about it is negative visualization, a psychological hack that ameliorates hdonic adaptation, reminds us of our mortality regularly and reminds us to focus on what is important. In my opinion, stoicism has a fair bit of overlap with the philosophy put forward in the Bhagwad Gita, for example a systamtic  classification of things that are and are not under our control, and deciding not to worry about things not under our control. 

