---
layout: post
title: "Do specific cultures cultivate the desire for purpose"
date: 2024-01-12
mathjax: true
---


I am interested in the following question: Is the search for a purpose a universal idea, or is it more prevalent in some cultures than others? The culture that I grew up in was middle-class Hindu Indian. During my time growing up, I did not come across friends or family who were in search of a purpose. However, now, 2-3 decades later, I see a number of friends who acknowledge their inner desire to find a strong purpose, even though much of middle-class Hindu culture still continues to subscribe to the values I grew up with, namely, the goal of a good life is to raise a good family, provide for your family, take care of one's parents, no mention of an overarching purpose. Ulimately, I'm interested in what this aspect of life was like in ancient India, the India of 400 BC to 1400 AD. There are two distinct possibilities in my mind (although these are not exhaustive): 

- In a sufficiently prosperous society, people do not need to worry about the basic securities of life: food, shelter, clothing, and some savings. In such a society, the minds of people are free enough to think of other things, and this is where the search for a purpose begins. In societies in which people are preoccupied with securing basic parts life, such thoughts do not emerge. 

- The second hypothesis is that the desire for an overarching purpose somehow is a an idea that derives from western philosphy, and therefore appears in western societies and now, with the homogenization of culture across the world thanks to first cable TV and now the internet, it also appears all over the world where such ideas have spread, perhaps unknowlingly. 


