---
layout: post
title: "Fasting"
date: 2024-06-15
mathjax: true
---

Several spiritual traditions in India have the practice of fasting regularly. In the Hindu tradition, Ekasasi is the 11th day of the lunar fortnightly cycle, during which some Hindis observe a fast. Some perform this fast without drink a drop of water, while some consume only water and nothing else, while some other limit thier food intake to only certain types of foods such as fruits. 

The practice of fasting regularly is interesting from the viewpoint of this blog for at least 3 different reasons: 
- It promotes physical health - as a kind of regular detox. And therefore it indirectly helps us stay healthier, and hence it make us more likely to remove obstacles in the way of stilling the mind during the course of our lives. Its harder to achive stillness of the mind if one is physically unhealthy. 
- Relatedly, it introduces a natural caloric reduction in our diets over time, reducing our calories by 1/15, approximately 6.5%, which again, in the present age of relative abundance is likely to keep us healthier in the long run. 
- It gives us direct practice to force the mind. Fasting is not easy. The stomach rumbles, the mind craves food. The neocortex then asks it to shut up. This repeated back and forth is good practice to still the mind. It is similar to how the mind wanders during meditation and the neocortex brings it back to the object of focus. 

While I cannot comment on the religious reasons for Ekadasi, I plan to try to incorporate it into my practice for the above reasons. The first Ekadasi I will be practicing is Tue June 18, 2024. I plan to drink water but abstain from food till 7 pm, after which I plan to eat a light meal. 
