---
layout: post
title: "I think the limbic brain is the seat of the ego"
date: 2025-03-09
mathjax: true
---


Some theories / conjectures about the mind and ego, pulling together a few disparate threads into a unified framework: 

- Very very roughly speaking, we all have two different brain organs - the evolutionarily much older animalistic brain and the much newer cerebral cortex. 
- As mentioned in several place elsewhere on this blog, the older brain is: 
 - Reactionary
 - Very fast
 - Responsible for survival, and pretty much only survival
 - Not involved in carefull critical thinking
- On the other hand the newer brain is: 
 - Is slow thinking
 - Can reason 
 - Is creative
- In this post I want to propose that the idea of 'ego' is aligned with the first type of brain, i.e. the evolutionarily older, animalistic brain. The ego is like a single threaded process running on the older brain, that is constantly looking for anything remotely perceived as a threat to survival. Because it evolved over a period of thousands of years where humans constantly faced a series of daily threats to survival - predators, food insecurity, social and tribal excommunication, etc., this program running in our limbic brain is attuned to those risks, and can signiicantly mis-calculate risks in our current modern environments. It is the job of the cerebral cortex to keep this process in check, quiet it down an direct it carefully. When the cortex fails to do this, the expression of self-preservation is bluntly manifest by the older brain in our behavior, most often in error - and it is these expressions that we term 'ego'. 
- The concept of 'ego' is a psychological construct - it is hard to scientifically measure - and I think for this reason, it does not appear much in scientific literature. 
- Alcohol: I think alcohol slows down our impulses (longer reaction time - this is measurable), and makes us let our guard down, causing fewer misfirings of the limbic system, i.e. fewer expressions of ego. Since ego is the feeling of separateness, invidividuality and surival, this lowering of ego also makes us feel similar and closer to otherswe are hanging out with, which creates a pleasant experience because of the feeling of oneness, and connectedness with others. When we are slightly inebriated, we have more interesting and enjoyable conversations with others who are also a bit inebriated - because there is less judgement, there is more one-ness. I think this is why, despite the ill effects of alcohol on physiological health, alcohol has endured in all cultures across the world, even evolving separately in mutiple cultures. It is bad for phsyical health but it is good for mental health. 
- Marijuana: I believe marijuana takes it a step further from alcohol. It temporarily turns off our limbic system, making us feel relaxed because there is no process running in the limbic brain constantly doing threat assessments. The lowering of the guard of self-survival is the same as the dissolution of individuality - and therefore one feels a sense of oneness with others around them. 
- Fear: I think fear is an emotion that constructed by the limbic brain, in response to a threat assessment. Evolutionarily, it has played an important role, by injecting the stress hormone Cortisol into our bloodstream, which causes our blood sugar level to rise, giving us extra energy to either fight or run away. Unfortunately, the difference between our modern environment and the one that we have evolved for, means that our fear response is very often (but not always) wrong - it is misfiring. There is often time availble to assess the situation more throughly, and decide whether fear is warranted. This is the job of the cerebral cortex. Practitioners of meditation, those with better control on their brain, are able to make this judgement call better. Repeated misfiring of fear, and subsequent Cortisol spikes are not good for physiological health, because they result in blood glucose spikes, which eventually lead to insulin resistance and then diabetes. 
- Meditation: meditation is simply the strengthening, by repeated exercise, of the ability of the cerebral cortex to take back control from the limbic system, and intervene between misfirings of the limbic system and reactions we perform in the physical and mental world. Therefore, advanced practitioners of meditation experience less of the distress arising out of the misfiring of the limbic system. Since they are more in control of their thought process, they can supress the emotions of fear, panic, aggression or anger that arise from a misfiring of the limbic system after it has incorrectly constructed a scenrio wherein one's sruvival is at risk. 
- I also think that some people are innately biologically hardwired to not have as much of a limbic response, and therefore suffer from fewer misfirings of the limbic system. This is simply a consequence of natural biological variation. 
- As some commentators have commented, our unique ability (unlike animals) to imagine scenarious is what makes us creative, but it is also what causes misfirings of our risk perception, i.e. the limbic misfirings I've talked about above. This point confuses me a bit thought - because in the model I've described above, the cerebral cortex is the seat of the creative imaginary process, while the limbic system is a separate organ responsible for risk assessment, fear, an survival. This point suggests that the scenarious creatively imagined by the cerebral cortex are being fed to the limbic system for risk assessment. 
- In hindu philosophy, the 'ego' is described as a feeling of separateness from everything else -- i.e. individuality. This matches well with the notion of self-preservation that the limbic brain is responsible for. 
- Well known fact - the experience of a situation (and therefore the experience of life itself) is driven to a large extent by the texture of our brain prcesses, i.e. how to interpret and react to situations, and only partly by the external events themselves. If we misinterpret events as being a threat to our survival, then we will constantly mis-react to them, and keep getting stressed by them. 
