For a long long time, I've been interested in understanding the variation in 'world views' of various people in the world -- how do people view the world, and why do they do what they do? How does they pick careers, an other important decisions that involve tradeoffs -- and how these things might be related to their upbringing and mentla model of how to the world works. 

I think this is an important question because: 

- We humans are mimetic creatures: we tend to copy others, either knowingly or unknowingly. [Here]() is a good overview of mimeticism. The primary reason for mimeticism seems to be that it is difficult (more time consuming, and energy consuming) to develop decision making logic from first principles each time.  
- If we are to copy others then its probably a good idea to be aware of _why_ someone did what they did. Because then we can evaluate whether we share a similar world view with the people we are going to copy. Otherwise we might inadvertantly end up making decisions that are incompatible with our world view and values. This is a bit like watching a movie on someone's recommendation without knowing what their taste is like. 

Another reason why this worth studying is because it helps one develop a more accurate model of how humans make decisions: while the function f(stuation) $-->$ decision is to learn, the function f(situation, world view, upbringing) $-->$ decision is less noisy, hence easier to learn. 

Thankfully, I'm not the only one with such curiousities - many people have written about this topic. Its interesting to think about how world views change across geographies, at a fixed point in time, but also across time at a fixed point in space, i.e. for a given country or community. Below, I'm going to ramble about the principal ways in which I've thought about world view's. 

- I've generally found that people who grew up in **low trust societies** tend to develop an attitude that everyone they interact with is out to get them - even when to move to higher trust societies.  
- Another way to categorize world views is along the axes **Optimistic/Pessimistic**, and Definite/Indefinite. Peter Thiel does a good job of describing this. I find this super interesting, perhaps because it connects to changes in the course of world history. 
- **Rural / urban**: rural people across the world _tend_ to have a dim view of urbanits, and generally feel victimized by unequal gains in economics progress. 
- **Risk averse individuals**: Individuals who were raised in resource constrained environments tend to be risk averse as they go about planning their lives and careers. I think this might hold even for individuals who grew up in relative abundance but whose parents or other recent ancestors grew up in resource constrained environments. Such individuals are not difficult to spot after having interacted with them for some time -- which makes their behavior predictable in some ways, and unfortunately this means that people in positions of power can sometimes take advantage of such individuals. 
- Conversely, invidividuals with **risk takining propensity** might be those with a safety net -- financial or family net. 
- Having the world view that one needs to have a **purpose**: this seems a rather rare trait in the general population. My current theory for why this is rare is that one only arrives at this stage after one's basic needs as per the Maslow's pyramid have all been met, and the set of people in the world for which this is the case is unfortunately, relatively small. Another route one might take to getting to this stage is if one has a near death experience such as an accident - something that reminds one vividly about one's own mortality.
- **Planning horizon**: this is a concept I've come up with myself as a way to explain people's behavior. Planning horizon is what it sounds like -- it is the (latent) amount of time in the future that a person has in mind when making important decisions. There are short-termists and long-termists. Visionaries by definition are long termists. What makes a person a short-termist? I suspect it again has to do with being raised in a resource constrinaed environment -- for such an environment evolutionarily hones the survival instinct, and (probably) biases one to make decisions that ensures survival in the short term, but this can come at the expense of developing long term thinking. 
- Quick or slow to adopt new technology: what kinds of people of of each type? My observation so far is that all else being equal risk averse people tend to be slow adopters, and opportunists tend to be fast adopters. New technology often carries a price, so even though it might confer an advantage, the risk averse person might not feel suitable incentivized to invest money into it. 
- The world is **stable Vs inherently in flux**: one type of person wants the world to be stable so he/she can adapt to it, the other knows that it is inherently in flux, i.e. new challenges and opportunities, what is accepted today can be blasphemy tomorrow, what is new today can be obsolete tomorrow, etc., and plans his/her life accordingly. 





